RAM Efficient FSDP Blog (#1412)
huggingface/blog: ram-efficient-pytorch-fsdp.md

---
title: "Fine-tuning Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/160_fsdp_llama/thumbnail.jpg
authors:
- user: smangrul
- user: sgugger
- user: letwun
- user: philschmid 
---

> In this blog post, we will look at how to fine-tune Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP and related best practices. We will be leveraging Hugging Face Transformers, Accelerate and TRL. We will also learn how to use Accelerate with SLURM. For more information on what PyTorch FSDP is, please refer to this blog: [Accelerate Large Model Training using PyTorch Fully Sharded Data Parallel](https://huggingface.co/blog/pytorch-fsdp).

Reviewer: turbo nit:
```suggestion
In this blog post, we will look at how to fine-tune Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP and related best practices. We will be leveraging Hugging Face Transformers, Accelerate and TRL. We will also learn how to use Accelerate with SLURM. For more information on what PyTorch FSDP is, please refer to this blog post: [Accelerate Large Model Training using PyTorch Fully Sharded Data Parallel](https://huggingface.co/blog/pytorch-fsdp).
```

> Fully Sharded Data Parallelism (FSDP) is a paradigm in which the optimizer states, gradients and paramters are sharded across the devices. During forward pass, each FSDP unit performs an all-gather operation to get the complete weights, computation is performed followed by discarding the shards from other devices. Post the forward pass, the loss is computed followed by backward pass. In backward pass, each FSDP unit performs an all-gather operation to get the complete weights, computation is performed to get the local gradients. These local gradients are averaged and sharded across the devices via reduce-scatter operation so that each devices can update the parameters of its shard.

Reviewer: some nits (maybe the link to the blog post would fit better after this text?):
```suggestion
Fully Sharded Data Parallelism (FSDP) is a paradigm in which the optimizer states, gradients and parameters are sharded across devices. During the forward pass, each FSDP unit performs an _all-gather operation_ to get the complete weights, with computation performed by discarding the shards from other devices. After the forward pass, the loss is computed followed by the backward pass. In the backward pass, each FSDP unit performs an all-gather operation to get the complete weights, with computation performed to get the local gradients. These local gradients are averaged and sharded across the devices via a _reduce-scatter operation_ so that each device can update the parameters of its shard.
```

![FSDP Workflow](./assets/62_pytorch_fsdp/FSDP_workflow.png)

(Source: [link](https://pytorch.org/blog/introducing-pytorch-fully-sharded-data-parallel-api/))

# Hardware Used

Number of nodes: 2. Minimum required is 1.  
Number of GPUs per node: 8  
GPU type: A100  
GPU memory: 80GB  
intra-node connection: NVLink  
RAM per node: 1TB  
CPU cores per node: 96  
inter-node connection: Elastic Fabric Adapter  

# Challenges with fine-tuning LLaMa 70B

We encountered three main challenges when trying to fine-tune LLaMa 70B with FSDP:

> 1. FSDP wraps the model after loading the pre-trained model. If each process/rank within a node loads the Llama-70B model, it would require 70\*4\*8 GB ~ 2TB of CPU RAM where 4 is the number of Bytes per parameter and 8 is the number of GPUs on each node. This would result in the CPU RAM getting out of memory leading to processes being terminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. FSDP wraps the model after loading the pre-trained model. If each process/rank within a node loads the Llama-70B model, it would require 70\*4\*8 GB ~ 2TB of CPU RAM, where 4 is the number of bytes per parameter and 8 is the number of GPUs on each node. This would result in the CPU RAM getting out of memory leading to processes being terminated.
```

> 2. Saving entire intermediate checkpoints using `FULL_STATE_DICT` with CPU offloading on rank 0 takes a lot of time and often results in NCCL Timeout errors due to indefinite hang during broadcasting. However, at the end of training, we want the whole model state dict instead of the sharded state dict which is only compatible with FSDP. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Saving entire intermediate checkpoints using `FULL_STATE_DICT` with CPU offloading on rank 0 takes a lot of time and often results in NCCL Timeout errors due to indefinite hanging during broadcasting. However, at the end of training, we want the whole model state dict instead of the sharded state dict which is only compatible with FSDP. 
```

3. Approx compute for above experiments = 6 \* P (num_params) \* D (num_tokens) = 6 \* 7e10 \* 1.64e7 = 6.89e18 FLOPS
4. Training FLOPS per second = Approx compute / training time = 6.89e17 / (13.5 \* 3600)  = 6.89e18 / 4.86e4 = 1.42e14 FLOPS per second
5. MFU = Training FLOPS per second / Peak A100 performance = 1.42e14 /  3.12e14 = 0.4551 = **45.51% of peak performance**

![train_loss](assets/160_fsdp_llama/train_loss.png)

Below is an example conversation using the above model:

```diff
System Prompt: You are a helpful, respectful and honest assistant. Always answer as helpfully \
as possible, while being safe. Your answers should not include any harmful, \
unethical, racist, sexist, toxic, dangerous, or illegal content. Please ensure that \
your responses are socially unbiased and positive in nature.

If a question does not make any sense, or is not factually coherent, explain why \
instead of answering something not correct. If you don’t know the answer to a \
question, please don’t share false information.

- Human: What is Deep Learning? Explain like a Pirate.

> + Assistant: Arrr Grumete! Are ye lookin' fer a proper explanation o' Deep Learnin'? 

Reviewer: Haha this is great!

---
title: "Fine-tuning Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/160_fsdp_llama/thumbnail.jpg
authors:
- user: smangrul
- user: sgugger
- user: letwun
- user: philschmid 
---

> In this blog, we will look at how to fine-tune Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP and related best practices. We will be leveraging Hugging Face Transformers, Accelerate and TRL. We will also learn how to use Accelerate with SLURM. For more information on what PyTorch FSDP is, please refer to this blog: [Accelerate Large Model Training using PyTorch Fully Sharded Data Parallel](https://huggingface.co/blog/pytorch-fsdp)

Author: Hello Philipp, there are few issues and forum questions on how to use SLURM with Accelerate: https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/issues/1239, https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/issues/1837, https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/use-accelerate-in-slurm-environment/24039/8, https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/using-accelerate-on-an-hpc-slurm/6286/9. So, thought that this is a good opportunity to show how to use Accelerate with SLURM. WDYT?

> 

Reviewer 2: Yes, especially in the intro.

2. Saving entire intermediate checkpoints using FULL_STATE_DICT with CPU offloading on rank 0 takes a lot of time and often results in NCCL Timeout errors due to indefinite hang during broadcasting. However, at the end of training, we want the whole model state dict instead of the sharded state dict which is only compatible with FSDP. 

3. We need to improve the speed and reduce the VRAM usage to train faster and save compute costs.

Let’s look at how to solve the above challenges and fine-tune 70B model. 
All the required resources:
1. Codebase:
https://github.com/pacman100/DHS-LLM-Workshop/tree/main/code_assistant/training with flash-attn V2 monkey patch

2. FSDP config: https://github.com/pacman100/DHS-LLM-Workshop/blob/main/code_assistant/training/configs/fsdp_config.yaml

3. SLURM script `launch.slurm`: https://gist.github.com/pacman100/1cb1f17b2f1b3139a63b764263e70b25

4. Model: `meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf`

5. Dataset: [smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1) (mix of LIMA+GUANACO with proper formatting in a ready-to-train format)

> ## Pre-requisites

Author: Done

First follow the these steps to install the Flash Attention V2:  Dao-AILab/flash-attention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention (github.com). Install the latest nightlies of PyTorch with CUDA ≥11.8. Install the remaining requirements as per DHS-LLM-Workshop/code_assistant/training/requirements.txt

# Fine-Tuning

## Addressing Challenge 1
PRs [huggingface/transformers#25107](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/25107) and [huggingface/accelerate#1777](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/pull/1777) solve the first challenge and requires no code changes from user side.  It does the following: 

> 1. Have the model load on `meta` device on all ranks

Reviewer: Depending on the intended audience, some of this jargon will be quite intimidating. What do you think about having a small section below that explains the concepts of rank and meta device (or points people to docs in e.g. `accelerate`)?

Reviewer 2: Agreed. You could just say
```suggestion
1. Create the model with no weights on all ranks (using the `meta` device)
```

Below is the output on a 7B model on 2 GPUs measuring the memory consumed and model parameters at various stages. We can observe that during loading the pre-trained model rank 0 & rank 1 have CPU total peak memory of `32744 MB` and `1506 MB` , respectively. Therefore, only rank 0 is loading the pre-trained model leading to efficient usage of CPU RAM. 

```bash
accelerator.process_index=0 GPU Memory before entering the loading : 0
accelerator.process_index=0 GPU Memory consumed at the end of the loading (end-begin): 0
accelerator.process_index=0 GPU Peak Memory consumed during the loading (max-begin): 0
accelerator.process_index=0 GPU Total Peak Memory consumed during the loading (max): 0
accelerator.process_index=0 CPU Memory before entering the loading : 926
accelerator.process_index=0 CPU Memory consumed at the end of the loading (end-begin): 26415
accelerator.process_index=0 CPU Peak Memory consumed during the loading (max-begin): 31818
accelerator.process_index=0 CPU Total Peak Memory consumed during the loading (max): 32744
accelerator.process_index=0 model.lm_head.weight=Parameter containing:

> tensor([[-0.0179,  0.0201, -0.0273,  ..., -0.0275, -0.0396, -0.0131],

Reviewer: Maybe remove the tensors since we're mostly interested in memory consumption?

accelerator.process_index=1 model.lm_head.weight=Parameter containing:
tensor([[-0.0179,  0.0201, -0.0273,  ..., -0.0275, -0.0396, -0.0131],
        [-0.0510, -0.0079, -0.0383,  ..., -0.0481,  0.0581,  0.0282],
        [-0.0217, -0.0216, -0.0064,  ..., -0.0508,  0.0554, -0.0013],
        ...,
        [ 0.0425,  0.0452, -0.0131,  ...,  0.0019,  0.0476,  0.0342],
        [-0.0170, -0.0085,  0.0449,  ..., -0.0074,  0.0178,  0.0043],
        [-0.0439, -0.0859, -0.0820,  ...,  0.0130,  0.0669,  0.0884]],
       device='cuda:1', requires_grad=True)
accelerator.process_index=0 model.lm_head.weight=Parameter containing:
tensor([[-0.0179,  0.0201, -0.0273,  ..., -0.0275, -0.0396, -0.0131],
        [-0.0510, -0.0079, -0.0383,  ..., -0.0481,  0.0581,  0.0282],
        [-0.0217, -0.0216, -0.0064,  ..., -0.0508,  0.0554, -0.0013],
        ...,
        [ 0.0425,  0.0452, -0.0131,  ...,  0.0019,  0.0476,  0.0342],
        [-0.0170, -0.0085,  0.0449,  ..., -0.0074,  0.0178,  0.0043],
        [-0.0439, -0.0859, -0.0820,  ...,  0.0130,  0.0669,  0.0884]],
       device='cuda:0', requires_grad=True)
```

## Addressing Challenge 2

> It is addressed via choosing `SHARDED_STATE_DICT` state dict type when creating FSDP config.

Reviewer: I would explain the difference between `SHARDED_STATE_DICT` and `FULL_STATE_DICT`

Let’s create the accelerate config via below command:
```
accelerate config --config_file "fsdp_config.yaml"
```

![fsdp_config](assets/160_fsdp_llama/fsdp_config.jpg)

The resulting config is available here: DHS-LLM-Workshop/code_assistant/training/configs/fsdp_config.yaml at main. Here, the sharding strategy is `FULL_SHARD`. We are using `TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP` for auto wrap policy and it uses `_no_split_module`  to find the Transformer block name for nested FSDP auto wrap. We use  `SHARDED_STATE_DICT` to save the intermediate checkpoints and optimizer states in this format recommended by the PyTorch team. Make sure to enable broadcasting module parameters from rank 0 at the start as mentioned in the above paragraph on addressing Challenge 1. We are enabling bf16 mixed precision training.

For final checkpoint being the whole model state dict, below code snippet is used:

```python
if trainer.is_fsdp_enabled:
    trainer.accelerator.state.fsdp_plugin.set_state_dict_type("FULL_STATE_DICT")

trainer.save_model(script_args.output_dir) # alternatively, trainer.push_to_hub() if the whole ckpt is below 50GB as the LFS limit per file is 50GB 
```

## Addressing Challenge 3

> Flash Attention and enabling gradient checkpointing are required for faster training and reducing VRAM usage to enable fine-tuning and save compute costs. 

Reviewer: Maybe add a pointer to any code you added to support Flash Attention and/or point people to BetterTransformer?

Author: Done

MASTER_PORT=6000

export LAUNCHER="accelerate launch \
    --config_file configs/fsdp_config.yaml \
    --main_process_ip $MASTER_ADDR \
    --main_process_port $MASTER_PORT \
    --machine_rank \$SLURM_PROCID \
    --num_processes $NUM_PROCESSES \
    --num_machines $NNODES \
    "
# Note: it is important to escape `$SLURM_PROCID` since we want the srun on each node to evaluate this variable

export PROGRAM="\
train.py \
--model_name "meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf" \
--dataset_name "smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1" \
--max_seq_len 2048 \
--bf16 True \
--num_train_epochs 2 \
--logging_steps 1 \
--packing True \
--output_dir "shared_storage/sourab/temp/full-finetune-llama70b-chat-asst" \
--per_device_train_batch_size 1 \
--gradient_accumulation_steps 1 \
--dataset_text_field "content" \
--learning_rate 5e-5  \
--lr_scheduler_type "cosine" \
--weight_decay 0.01 \
--warmup_ratio 0.03 \
--use_flash_attn True \
--use_gradient_checkpointing True
"

export CMD="$LAUNCHER $PROGRAM"

srun --jobid $SLURM_JOBID bash -c "$CMD" 2>&1 | tee -a $LOG_PATH
```

Fine-tuning completed in ~1 hour and below is the training loss plot.

> ![train_loss](assets/160_fsdp_llama/train_loss.jpg)

Reviewer: Maybe we can share a fun text generation from the resulting model? E.g. something about FSDP :)

---
title: "Fine-tuning Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/160_fsdp_llama/thumbnail.jpg
authors:
- user: smangrul
- user: sgugger
- user: letwun
- user: philschmid 
---

In this blog post, we will look at how to fine-tune Llama 2 70B using PyTorch FSDP and related best practices. We will be leveraging Hugging Face Transformers, Accelerate and TRL. We will also learn how to use Accelerate with SLURM. For more information on what PyTorch FSDP is, please refer to this blog: [Accelerate Large Model Training using PyTorch Fully Sharded Data Parallel](https://huggingface.co/blog/pytorch-fsdp)

# Hardware Used

Number of nodes: 8. Minimum required is 1.  
Number of GPUs per node: 8  
GPU type: A100  
GPU memory: 80GB  
intra-node connection: NVLink  
RAM per node: 1TB  
CPU cores per node: 96  
inter-node connection: Elastic Fabric Adapter  

# Challenges with fine-tuning LLaMa 70B

We encountered three main challenges when trying to fine-tune LLaMa 70B with FSDP:

> 1. FSDP wraps the model after loading the pre-trained model. If each process/rank within a node loads the Llama-70B model, it would require 70*4*8 GB ~ 2TB of CPU RAM. This would result in the CPU RAM getting out of memory leading to processes being terminated.

Reviewer 2: You should explain where the *4 and *8 come from, users are not very good at computing the memory needed by models in general, so it won't be obvious to the reader.

2. FSDP config: https://github.com/pacman100/DHS-LLM-Workshop/blob/main/code_assistant/training/configs/fsdp_config.yaml

3. SLURM script `launch.slurm`: https://gist.github.com/pacman100/1cb1f17b2f1b3139a63b764263e70b25

4. Model: `meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf`

5. Dataset: [smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1) (mix of LIMA+GUANACO with proper formatting in a ready-to-train format)

## Pre-requisites

First follow these steps to install Flash Attention V2:  Dao-AILab/flash-attention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention (github.com). Install the latest nightlies of PyTorch with CUDA ≥11.8. Install the remaining requirements as per DHS-LLM-Workshop/code_assistant/training/requirements.txt

# Fine-Tuning

## Addressing Challenge 1
PRs [huggingface/transformers#25107](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/25107) and [huggingface/accelerate#1777](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/pull/1777) solve the first challenge and requires no code changes from user side.  It does the following: 

1. Have the model load on `meta` device on all ranks

> 2. Load the state dict only on rank==0 and set the param values from `meta` to `cpu` for rank==0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Load the state dict only on rank==0 and set the model weights with that state dict on rank 0
```

> 3. For all other ranks, do `torch.empty(*param.size(), dtype=dtype)` for every parameter on `meta` device

Reviewer 2: Here it's unclear how we avoid going OOM as doing `torch.empty` still allocates memory normally. Are you putting those weights on the GPU of that rank?

Author: Hello, I'm using Stas's code for measuring CPU RAM usage which leverages `process.memory_info().rss` to get the `Resident set size (RSS)` which is a measure of how much memory a process is consuming in physical RAM, so actual RAM usage. `torch.empty` does allocate memory (virtually), but does not initialize this memory space ([pytorch discussion post](https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/torch-empty-does-not-allocate-memory/44597/7)). I did a little more digging into this as it was confusing for me too. Found it github issue which is very insightful: https://github.com/dask/distributed/issues/1409. Especially this [comment](https://github.com/dask/distributed/issues/1409#issuecomment-330867695). Attaching the relevant snippet below:

```
  Initially, an anonymous mapping only allocates virtual memory.  The new
  mapping starts with a redundant copy on write mapping of the zero page.
  (The zero page is a single page of physical memory filled with zeroes,
  maintained by the operating system.)  Every virtual page of the anonymous
  mapping is attached to this existing prezeroed page, so attempts to read
  from anywhere in the mapping return zeroed memory even though no new
  physical memory has been allocated to it yet.

  Attempts to write to the page trigger the normal copy-on-write mechanism in
  the page fault handler, allocating fresh memory only when needed to allow
  the write to proceed.  (Note, prezeroing optimizations change the
  implementation details here, but the theory's the same.)  Thus "dirtying"
  anonymous pages allocates physical memory, the actual allocation call only
  allocates virtual memory.
```

You can see below this is what is happening when I use `torch.empty`. I get `0GB` RSS usage and when I print the empty tensor, it is all zeros.

<img width="715" alt="Screenshot 2023-08-26 at 9 42 59 AM" src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/assets/13534540/9790f204-f223-4fdc-b3b5-742812669b2f">

> 4. So, rank==0 will have loaded the model with correct state dict while all other ranks will have random/0 weights.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. So, rank==0 will have loaded the model with correct state dict while all other ranks will have random weights.
```
`torch.empty` does not set anything to 0

Let’s create the accelerate config via below command:
```
accelerate config --config_file "fsdp_config.yaml"
```

![fsdp_config](assets/160_fsdp_llama/fsdp_config.jpg)

The resulting config is available here: DHS-LLM-Workshop/code_assistant/training/configs/fsdp_config.yaml at main. Here, the sharding strategy is `FULL_SHARD`. We are using `TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP` for auto wrap policy and it uses `_no_split_module`  to find the Transformer block name for nested FSDP auto wrap. We use  `SHARDED_STATE_DICT` to save the intermediate checkpoints and optimizer states in this format recommended by the PyTorch team. Make sure to enable broadcasting module parameters from rank 0 at the start as mentioned in the above paragraph on addressing Challenge 1. We are enabling bf16 mixed precision training.

For final checkpoint being the whole model state dict, below code snippet is used:

```python
if trainer.is_fsdp_enabled:
    trainer.accelerator.state.fsdp_plugin.set_state_dict_type("FULL_STATE_DICT")

trainer.save_model(script_args.output_dir) # alternatively, trainer.push_to_hub() if the whole ckpt is below 50GB as the LFS limit per file is 50GB 
```

> ## Addressing Challenge 3

Reviewer 2: This is a bit short here. Could you flesh this out?

Author: Done.

MASTER_PORT=6000

export LAUNCHER="accelerate launch \
    --config_file configs/fsdp_config.yaml \
    --main_process_ip $MASTER_ADDR \
    --main_process_port $MASTER_PORT \
    --machine_rank \$SLURM_PROCID \
    --num_processes $NUM_PROCESSES \
    --num_machines $NNODES \
    "
# Note: it is important to escape `$SLURM_PROCID` since we want the srun on each node to evaluate this variable

export PROGRAM="\
train.py \
--model_name "meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf" \
--dataset_name "smangrul/code-chat-assistant-v1" \
--max_seq_len 2048 \
--bf16 True \
--num_train_epochs 2 \
--logging_steps 1 \
--packing True \
--output_dir "shared_storage/sourab/temp/full-finetune-llama70b-chat-asst" \
--per_device_train_batch_size 1 \
--gradient_accumulation_steps 1 \
--dataset_text_field "content" \
--learning_rate 5e-5  \
--lr_scheduler_type "cosine" \
--weight_decay 0.01 \
--warmup_ratio 0.03 \
--use_flash_attn True \
--use_gradient_checkpointing True
"

export CMD="$LAUNCHER $PROGRAM"

srun --jobid $SLURM_JOBID bash -c "$CMD" 2>&1 | tee -a $LOG_PATH
```

Fine-tuning completed in ~1 hour and below is the training loss plot.

![train_loss](assets/160_fsdp_llama/train_loss.jpg)

# Conclusion

> We successfully fine-tuned 70B Llama model using PyTorch FSDP in a multi-node multi-gpu setting while addressing various challenges. 

Reviewer 2: This could also be expanded a bit.

Author: Done
